initial upload for pull request (#20)
sovereigntech/memorysafetyEU: statement.md

> # Europe Should Adopt Memory Safe Technology to Achieve a secure future

Author: Come up with new title, see #1

Apr 15, 2025\.  First draft by Tara Tarakiyee and Hugo van de Pol.

Goal: collect comments

# Executive Summary

> Memory safety vulnerabilities account for 60-70% of all software security issues in major digital systems written in memory-unsafe programming languages. As cyber threats intensify globally, Europe has the groundwork and potential to make memory safe technologies a cornerstone of secure digital infrastructure. This statement calls for decisive action from European governmentdecision makers and industry leaders to prioritize memory safety as part of a comprehensive "secure-by-design" approach.

Author: see #2

> Memory safety vulnerabilities account for 60-70% of all software security issues in major digital systems written in memory-unsafe programming languages. As cyber threats intensify globally, Europe has the groundwork and potential to make memory safe technologies a cornerstone of secure digital infrastructure. This statement calls for decisive action from European governmentdecision makers and industry leaders to prioritize memory safety as part of a comprehensive "secure-by-design" approach.

Author: Find better wording for "decision makers", see #19

Reviewer: I would say a long list of the groups we want to target is:

- European law makers (ie those involved with the CRA) and national law makers (those who translate European directives in national law for example)
- European and national standard bodies (involved in the standards for those laws)
- European and national decision makers that decide on the conditions underlying the procurement of digital solutions by the government, and the conditions underlying R&D grants
- Industry leaders who decide on the technology their organization uses

The questions then is how to summarize this in the executive. An option would be: "we call on everyone who influences techonology decisions, i.e. everyone from European law makers to industry leaders, to those in governement setting grant conditions..."

> Memory safety vulnerabilities account for 60-70% of all software security issues in major digital systems written in memory-unsafe programming languages. As cyber threats intensify globally, Europe has the groundwork and potential to make memory safe technologies a cornerstone of secure digital infrastructure. This statement calls for decisive action from European governmentdecision makers and industry leaders to prioritize memory safety as part of a comprehensive "secure-by-design" approach.

Reviewer: To do in final editing

In prior years major publications by the U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and the U.S. White House have set the tone on the importance of memory safety \[[1](https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/2023-10/Shifting-the-Balance-of-Cybersecurity-Risk-Principles-and-Approaches-for-Secure-by-Design-Software.pdf), [2](https://www.cisa.gov/resources-tools/resources/case-memory-safe-roadmaps), [3](https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/Final-ONCD-Technical-Report.pdf), [4](https://www.cisa.gov/resources-tools/resources/product-security-bad-practices), [5](https://www.cisa.gov/resources-tools/resources/secure-design-alert-eliminating-buffer-overflow-vulnerabilities)\], however in recent times the US-based agency is facing major budget cuts. Leadership from European institutions and organisations to secure our common digital infrastructure is not only long overdue, it is also imperative in the current geopolitical moment. With the EU Cyber Resilience Act, a first legislation prioritizes secure by design development, an approach heavily supported by memory safety.

We call on:

> * European decision-makers in government and industry (including regulators) to take a clear stance and develop guidance on adopting memory safe technologies.

Reviewer: Don't we also want to (or need) to first call on these audienced to recognize the fact that using memory safe tech is essential for building systems that are truly secure by design?

Author: Do you have a proposal for rephrasing?

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we move this to the call of action below?

Memory safety refers to the ability of programming languages \- the very building blocks of all of the digital systems we rely on every day \-  to prevent security vulnerabilities that are due to accidentally mishandling memory.

These memory-related vulnerabilities:

* Account for [60%–70% of all software security vulnerabilities](https://www.chromium.org/Home/chromium-security/memory-safety/) in large codebases written in memory unsafe languages;

> * Are typically hard to detect, costly to fix when they appear in production, and often used in exploits;

Reviewer: The source Dion mentioned (https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.com/2021/12/a-deep-dive-into-nso-zero-click.html) is a good source for showing how impactful mem safety vulnerabilities can be.

Another example is that the root cause of the Dutch MOD hack in 2023 (https://www.reuters.com/technology/cybersecurity/china-cyber-spies-hacked-computers-dutch-defence-ministry-report-2024-02-06/) was a memory safety issue as well. See https://www.reuters.com/technology/cybersecurity/china-cyber-spies-hacked-computers-dutch-defence-ministry-report-2024-02-06/, https://www.ncsc.nl/binaries/ncsc/documenten/publicaties/2024/februari/6/mivd-aivd-advisory-coathanger-tlp-clear/TLP-CLEAR+MIVD+AIVD+Advisory+COATHANGER.pdf,  and https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2022-42475

> * Are typically hard to detect, costly to fix when they appear in production, and often used in exploits;

Author: Add examples from OpenSSL / Linux kernel and other lower level software components

> * Are typically hard to detect, costly to fix when they appear in production, and often used in exploits;

Author: See Heartbleed (CVE-2014-0160), embedded TCP stacks ([icsa-20-343-01](https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/ics-advisories/icsa-20-343-01))

> * Are typically hard to detect, costly to fix when they appear in production, and often used in exploits;

Author: I mentioned several references: \[[1](https://heartbleed.com/), [2](https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.com/p/0day.html), [3](https://www.reuters.com/technology/cybersecurity/china-cyber-spies-hacked-computers-dutch-defence-ministry-report-2024-02-06/), [4](https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/ics-advisories/icsa-20-343-01)\]

* Persist despite decades of developer training and tooling aimed at preventing them.

Memory safe languages (e.g. **Rust**, **Swift**, or **Java**) mitigate these risks by enforcing strict rules, making it impossible to introduce entire classes of memory-related bugs by default. This makes memory safety one of the most powerful methods for achieving secure-by-design systems.

# Why Memory Safe Tech Is Crucial

> Choosing memory safe technologies is one of the most impactful decisions a manufacturer of digital infrastructure components can make to improve cybersecurity. 

Author: Add advantages beyond Cybersecurity, see #3

* Security gains are systemic: By transitioning to memory safe languages, up to 70% of vulnerabilities can be eliminated.

* Security becomes scalable: It reduces reliance on human vigilance, which is increasingly unsustainable in the face of talent shortages, increasingly complex systems, and growing attack surfaces.

* Prevention becomes the default: By enforcing security at the language level, the software becomes safer by default, not by afterthought.

# The Urgency for Action: Secure-by-Design

We are at a pivotal moment:

* Global tensions and cyber warfare are on the rise, while our dependence on digital infrastructure grows daily;

* The cost of cyber breaches continues to climb, with some incidents costing billions;

> * There is an acute shortage of cybersecurity professionals and qualified software engineers. Moreover, universities are largely moving away from memory-unsafe languages like C in their undergraduate courses. 

Author: "Moreover, universities are largely moving away from memory-unsafe languages like C in their undergraduate courses" - Citation needed
#8

Reviewer: I don't think that universities moving away from memory-unsafe languages like C has to do with urgency for action regarding secure-by-design.

I do agree that the current shortage of highly skilled software engineers, especially those who know about secure coding, is another reason for shifting the burden of getting security right to the language, instead of the programmer.

Author: Phrase it the other way around: More and more Memory Safe Languages are taught in Universities.

All of this demands a shift in mindset: from reactive patching to proactive prevention.

Considering security earlier in the development lifecycle is not a new concept, but certainly no longer optional. This has been recognized in Europe by the passing of the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) and its security-by-design requirement. 

As the standards for the CRA are currently being developed, it’s important to consider memory safety early in their design, and include strategies to shift towards memory-safe tech where feasible, and include resources for remediation where not.

# Europe Has the Groundwork, but needs to act decisively

For decades, memory unsafe languages like C and C++ were the only viable option for performance-critical systems such as operating systems, browsers, and networking stacks. This is no longer the case.

> With the rise of modern, performant memory safe languages—most notably Rust—it is now feasible to build even low-level systems securely. Furthermore, we are seeing encouraging advances towards memory-safe C++. 

Author: "Furthermore, we are seeing encouraging advances towards memory-safe C++"
Citation needed, see #11

Reviewer: Apparently the safe C++ proposal is considered "dead" by some, see https://www.reddit.com/r/cpp/comments/1hppdzc/whats_the_latest_on_safe_c/. So not sure how encouriging the advances are.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we keep it as encouragement?

> That said, we are not advocating a wholesale rewrite of legacy systems. That would not be feasible. But we can and should:

Author: Cost estimates of this effort can be found in submissions to the U.S. RFP on Open Source Security, if needed.
See #12

* Use memory safe languages for the development of new code or components; 

* Gradually transition critical components in legacy systems where feasible;

* Introduce meaningful mitigations to reduce the risk in existing and legacy memory-unsafe systems. 

The path towards memory safety is not an easy one, but in our view the long-term security, economic, and societal benefits far outweigh the costs of inaction. Europe already has a strong foundation for this transition:

* Developers and companies in Europe have been significant contributors to open-source, memory safe critical infrastructure, such as implementations of the critical internet protocols Domain Name System (DNS) and Network Time Protocol (NTP), as well as in industries such as energy and automobile sectors;    
* There is growing adoption of memory safe languages in critical infrastructure applications and industry, according to the latest State of Rust survey. 

While the foundation exists, to get to a memory-safe future, we need shifts in development teams and supply chains, as well as long-term planning and coordinated action across industries and governments.

> # We Call Upon Government and Industry to:

Author: I bundled these  as proposed. now we have one short general CTA,  two shorter ones for industries and standardization bodies and a larger one for EU/governments.

> With the rise of modern, performant memory safe languages—most notably Rust for low-level systems, and languages like Go, Swift, and Python for higher-level applications—memory safety is now achievable across the entire software stack. Furthermore, we are seeing encouraging advances towards memory-safe C++. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the rise of modern, performant memory safe languages — most notably Rust for low-level systems, and languages like Go, Swift, and Python for higher-level applications — memory safety is now achievable across the entire software stack. Furthermore, we observe encouraging advances towards memory-safe C++. 
```

> * **Take a decisive stance**: Formally recognize memory safety as a cornerstone of Europe's cyber resilience strategy and include specific memory safety requirements in the implementation guidelines for the Cyber Resilience Act. Where existing memory-unsafe languages are in use, this would include recommendations on measures to reduce risk where feasible.

Author: "What specific guidelines are you targeting with this statement? Is this comment addressed to the standardisation efforts currently underway at CEN/CENELEC/ETSI? Or someone/something else?"
See #17

> * **Understand the economic and security business case for memory safety:** Look into the long-term financial advantages of memory-safe technologies, including reduced security incident costs, decreased downtime, lower maintenance burdens, and enhanced customer trust.

Reviewer: I looked at this. The original comment in #18 is about the call to action "Understand the economic and security business case for memory safety: ". While I think the comment addresses a relevant point, I think we should make this point elsewhere. 

I would propose adding more numbers and sources to the "What is Memory Safety" section so it becomes clear in that section there often is a positive business case for adopting memory safe tech.

One remark and source we could add in this section is that zero-days exploited in the wild are very often memory safety related vulnerabilities, see this sheet https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1lkNJ0uQwbeC1ZTRrxdtuPLCIl7mlUreoKfSIgajnSyY/view?gid=0#gid=0, tab 2025, linked in this Project Zero news update https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.com/p/0day.html. A quick count on the 2025 tab reveals 20 out of 28 i.e.  71% of the CVEs is about memory corruption. For 2024 there are 34 zero days of which 25 are memory corruption related (73%).

> * **Understand the economic and security business case for memory safety:** Look into the long-term financial advantages of memory-safe technologies, including reduced security incident costs, decreased downtime, lower maintenance burdens, and enhanced customer trust.

Author: added to references

> * Developers and companies in Europe have been significant contributors to open-source, memory safe critical infrastructure, such as implementations of the critical internet protocols Domain Name System (DNS) and Network Time Protocol (NTP), as well as in industries such as energy and automobile sectors;    

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Developers and companies in Europe have been significant contributors to open source, memory safe critical infrastructure, such as implementations of the critical internet protocols Domain Name System (DNS) and Network Time Protocol (NTP), as well as in industries such as energy and automobile sectors;    
```
